Project Analysis Proposal for EE282

Guan-Yin Stevens
# Project Analysis Proposal
# Guan-Yin Stevens
# EE282

## Introduction

Responding to changing glucose levels is a requirement found in all eukaryotic systems. Processing, storing, and utilizing incoming nutrients from the environment is required to maintain homeostatic levels of cellular function across all eukaryotes. It is critical to maintain a normal amount of sugar in the blood, by storing away any excess sugar or utilizing that storage or creating glucose upon instances where there is too little glucose within the blood (Chourpiliadis and Mohiuddin, 2019; Kolb et al., 2020). As all cell types depend on glucose, the regulation of glucose levels is critical. As such, this process is well conserved from mammals to invertebrates, such as *Drosophila melanogaster (Drosophila)* (Das and Dobens, 2015; Mattila and Hietakangas, 2017). 
*Drosophila* regulate and respond to changing sugar levels similarly to mammalian systems, possessing several homologs and orthologs of transcription factors that are involved in regulating various metabolic genes. However, unlike mammalian systems, it has been well established that the Transforming Growth Factor-Beta (TGF-β) superfamily plays an essential role in the secretion of insulin, an important protein required to signal for cells to uptake glucose (Ghosh and O’Connor, 2014). The TGF-β ligand, Dawdle, has been shown in studies to be required for insulin secretion, seen by an accumulation of unreleased insulin in its absence (Ghosh and O’Connor, 2014). *dawdle* mutants develop diabetes-like phenotypes due to the lack of insulin secretion, such as an increase in blood sugar levels, obesity, and poor storage of glucose and glycogen (Ghosh and O’Connor, 2014; Graham and Pick, 2017). 

## Project Analysis
I am interested in identifying factors that may regulate dawdle expression. While there is a small network of genes that are well-established in regulating sugar homeostasis, I am interested in further elucidating additional factors may regulate sugar homeostasis, through the regulation of *dawdle*. Mondo and Mlx (ChREBP/MondoA and Mlx in mammals) are two known master transcriptional regulators that are directly activated by the presence of sugar in the cell, leading to the activation of other downstream factors that will regulate genes involved in metabolism (Mattila et al., 2015; Mattila and Hietakangas, 2017). To start, I would like to analyze include available datasets acquired through performing bulk RNA-Seq from *mlx* mutants, which no longer possess the master regulator transcription factors required to activate other sugar responsive factors (Mattila et al., 2015). From this, I would like to identify factors that may be working independently from *mlx*, by looking to see which factors are downregulated on diet with no sugar and are upregulated on a diet with high levels of sugar. From these data sets, looking at RNA up-regulation and down-regulation, as well as presenting that data in a clear manner are the some of the primary goals.
Additionally, if time allowed, I would like to analyze an additional dataset that has been published, which contains sequenced genome wide expression patterns on a starvation diet and high sugar diet in wild-type flies (van den Berg et al., 2023). This would allow me to compare the two datasets to see which genes are potentially upregulated through the Mondo-Mlx complex, and genes that are regulated by a different transcriptional mechanism. This would allow us to further elucidate how the response to changing sugar levels may be regulated, specifically through which transcription factors may be upregulated or downregulated. In doing so, I can compare the regulation patterns between this data set and the previous one and can work to find transcription factors that may remain upregulated across both sets on a high sugar diet, suggesting that they may work independently of Mondo-Mlx. To determine if any of the identified transcription factors could potentially regulate dawdle expression, I would perform a motif search across the regulatory regions of dawdle to identify potential binding sites. 
To perform the analysis, I would first start by downloading and creating folders for the data, and an additional folder for the output of the analysis. To start with the analysis, I would like to check the quality of the raw data. Since I am working with RNASeq data, I would use FASTQC to check the quality of the raw sequences. From there, I would then trim reads of poor quality, as well as adapter sequences if present. After trimming the poor quality reads, I would then re-evaluate the filtered data using FASTQC to check the quality. I would then align the reads to the reference genome, which would be the *Drosophila* genome. Prior to that, I would need to index the genome as well as add gene anootations to allow for reads to align over exon-intron boundaries. Following alignment, I would then calculate gene hit counts, or the reads per gene. I could use FeatureCounts to perform this analysis. I would focus on alignments and reads that align with exons only, to then begin to identify genes. To compare hit counts, I would perform my analysis in R. Relevant R packages that I would use for my analysis include DESeq2, which will aid in analyzing which genes are differentially expressed on the different dietary conditions. To visualize the data, packages that I would use include the following: gplots, ggplots, lattice, and pheatmaps. While there may be more packages that I utilize, this will allow me to perform the initial analysis, while displaying the data in a clear and presentable manner. 

## Conclusion
For my project I hope to analyze publicly accessible datasets containing RNASeq data from *Drosophila* fed on starvation and high sugar diets, in a wild-type and mlx1 background. By doing so, this will allow me to elucidate other transcription factors involved in the regulation of sugar homeostasis which may act in a sugar-responsive manner. My main goal of the project is to hopefully identify transcription factors that may regulate *dawdle*. Additionally, it allows me to investigate if there are transcription factors that regulate sugar homeostasis outside of Mondo-Mlx regulation. This project is feasible as I will use datasets that have been previously published and requires no permissions to use. If time allows, I will analyze and compare the second data set, but my primary goal will be to perform the Additionally, some of the analyses of these data sets have been published and validated, allowing me to double-check my initial results in identifying factors with my own analysis. In the future, I would like to perform ATAC-Seq using a method that performs transcription factor footprinting on DNA from flies that were fed on a starvation diet and high sugar diet to further validate these interactions (Bentsen et al., 2020). 

## References
Bentsen, M., Goymann, P., Schultheis, H., Klee, K., Petrova, A., Wiegandt, R., Fust, A., Preussner, J., Kuenne, C., Braun, T., Kim, J., Gagneur, J., and Looso, M. 2020. ATAC-seq footprinting unravels kinetics of transcription factor binding during zygotic genome activation. Nat. Commun. 11: 4267.

van den Berg, L., Kockx, C.E.M., van der Horst, S., van der Kallen, C.J.H., Schalkwijk, C.G., Stehouwer, C.D.A., and van Greevenbroek, M.M.J. 2023. Sugar-responsive inhibition of Myc-dependent ribosome biogenesis by Clockwork orange. Cell Rep. 42: 112739.

Chourpiliadis, C. and Mohiuddin, S.S. 2019. Biochemistry, gluconeogenesis. Available at: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK544346/.

Das, R. and Dobens, L.L. 2015. Conservation of gene and tissue networks regulating insulin signalling in flies and vertebrates. Biochem. Soc. Trans. 43: 1057–1062.

Ghosh, A.C. and O’Connor, M.B. 2014. Systemic Activin signaling independently regulates sugar homeostasis, cellular metabolism, and pH balance in Drosophila melanogaster. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 111: 5729–5734.

Graham, P. and Pick, L. 2017. Drosophila as a model for diabetes and diseases of insulin resistance. Curr. Top. Dev. Biol. 121: 397–419.

Kolb, H., Martin, S., and Kempf, K. 2020. Insulin: too much of a good thing is bad. BMC Med. 18: 224.

Mattila, J., Bremer, A., Ahonen, L., Kallijärvi, J., and Hietakangas, V. 2015. Mondo-Mlx mediates organismal sugar sensing through the Gli-similar transcription factor Sugarbabe. Cell Rep. 13: 350–364.

Mattila, J. and Hietakangas, V. 2017. Regulation of carbohydrate energy metabolism in Drosophila melanogaster. Genetics 207: 1231–1253.
